What you want to get down is some of the facts. You
probably in this course of study, you've been
there and you've studied a little bit about the
history of Vietnam. Okay, I got my orders to go to
Vietnam and left right after New Year's. And it was
cold, it was cold in January in New York. And I flew
from New York to San Francisco and got in there at
night to this one particular building in San
Francisco International Airport. Kind of waited
around with another 150 other guys that were going
to Vietnam. Some for their second tour and some for
their first tour like myself. Lots of young guys?
Yeah, sure. Lots of guys my age too by now, like 27,
28. A lot of career military guys, sergeants,
officers. And this is our job. We're going to work.
This is what we were trained to do. This is what we
were motivated to do.
that and I believe that today. Those guys got on
that plane, nobody put a gun on them. I could have
resigned my commission at the airport and gone
home. That was my job. That's what I was trained to
do. That's what I signed on to be. I got on that plane
to San Francisco and it was a commercial airplane
with stewardesses and everything. It was a
charter. Transglobal or something. It was a
charter fleet. You just like flying TWA or paying
them. They served us the little meals and We got to
fly to Hawaii and we got there very early in the
morning to Hawaii. I remember how Hawaii smelled
of flowers. And we just walked around the airport
while we were through the plane. It was like two
o'clock in the morning. We're going off to war and
the airport's deserted. No brass bands or
anything. We're going to war. This is in January of
68. And from there we flew to Hawaii.
It's a little tiny manhole cover out in the middle
of the Pacific. And they were refueling just this
Navy installation to refuel the plane there.
Watch the sun come up out of the Pacific. It's
something I'll never forget. And from there, we
flew to right in Vietnam. I remember the
stewardess, we landed at Ben Hoa Epe. The
stewardess says, welcome to Ben Hoa, Vietnam.
Everybody said boo. Just like welcome to
Cincinnati, or welcome to New York, or welcome to
San Antonio. She says, welcome to Ben Hoa,
Vietnam. And she did wish us all good luck in our
tours of duty. And then that same plane would take
out another plane load of guys who were rotating
back to the States. We got off the plane, it was
during the day, and the first thing that struck you
was the enormous heat and humidity and the dust and
the smell of Vietnam. We got in, it was in the
evening, they put us, got us some supper. I forget
where we had, so we had something to eat and then
crashed. They had some temporary barracks there
for us, just wooden shacks really. We crashed and
had an outdoor latrine in there. I think it was
washed up a little bit. I knew what, as an officer
you had orders directly to a unit, so it was just a
matter of hooking up. The next morning there was a
two and a half ton truck and we all going up to
division headquarters, 25th Division
Headquarters.
And we all threw our gear. We put some fatigues on.
We had stateside fatigues, not jungle fatigues.
We put some fatigues on, threw the rest of our gear
on the back of the truck, and off we went up Highway 1
from Ben Hoa to Cu Chi. And that was my first
exposure to Vietnam. I was sat in the front. I was
seeing a guy on a truck, so I rode in the front with
the driver. He had an M16 with one clip of
ammunition, 18 rounds. That was the only weapons
we had on this truck. And we just drove up the middle
of that road, 25 miles. at Coochee Divisional
Headquarters, just like we were driving down
Interstate 35. I mean, there was a lot of civilians
and people running around, and we had to blow the
horn a lot to get everybody out of the way. The
driver was a young fellow, enlisted man. He said,
oh, this damn thing's almost over. What happens?
He'd hide in the hair of Charlie in weeks, months.
Hadn't been mortared or rocketed. Nobody shot at
him. It's been quiet. Of course, we didn't know
that they were infiltrating and getting ready for
that type of offensive. They were all hiding out in
the jungle. But we drove up to the divisional
headquarters, just bigger than Dixie, 20 guys on a
truck and one gun. Anybody want to take us out, they
could. Got to the divisional headquarters, I was
assigned to the 2nd Battalion, 14th Infantry as
their signal officer. Well, I drew my gear and an
M16 rifle, sign for some equipment, because as I
said, I had to sign for cryptography equipment.
You know what cryptography equipment is? What
that is, is it's automatic coding and decoding
machines for communications. Like a cryptogram.
Yeah, okay, just like that. And even a battalion
that we had, so I had to check everything on the sign
for it. And I had a repair shop that would fix the
radios and stuff back at the battalion.
They had taken a brigade up there and made a forward
base up there near the Cambodian border, had an air
field on it that we had built out of the jungle and
that was the big jungle up there and we drove in a
convoy and every morning a convoy would leave the
division headquarters to go to this base camp and
every morning the first people out on the convoy
was a company of mechanized infantry because the
bad guys would ambush and they'd have to fight
their way up the road every morning. And we were in a
cowboy, and that was my first dust, I won't forget
the dust in January. I still have it. I have a
triangular bandage that's part of a first aid kit.
I made a cowboy-style bandana just to keep the dust
out. And I went up there to join the battalion. We'd
get shot at occasionally up there. I remember the
rats up there, huge, as big as dogs. I was in a
foxhole when a rat jumped on my stomach, so we left a
little candle on it and the rats didn't like light,
but if you put all the lights out in the foxhole, the
rats would come in there. Big rats, huge rats.
Everything was big up there. They had pythons
crawling across the airfield, they had rats as big
as, we have, you know, cats here in the house, rats
as big as that. Big. Mosquitoes. Hmm? Mosquitoes
were a problem. No, there probably were no
mosquitoes. Scorpions as big as crawfish. Yeah,
big black scorpion. But that's, that's not real
important. We got up there and everybody's
getting ready for this big truce. It's gonna have a
ceasefire, very intense. And we're right up near
the Cambodian border and we had artillery, we had
airfield, we had all sorts of infantry units out
there. I mean, it was a good, Good place ever. Now
being a Signal Corps guy, we had switchboard and we
had radios and we also had a multi-band radio just
like you're using here. You could get everything.
We listened to AFN Saigon. And that night, first
night of the Tet ceasefire, a young soldier came
and said, Captain, you need to come on down to
Switchboard Bunker and listen to this. Okay. So I
got out my foxhole and what's going on? There's
AFN. All you can hear is this guy saying, stay in
your BOQs, stay in your barracks. And you hear
gunfire in the background. You hear airplanes.
And this is on a radio station in Saigon. We thought
it was a joke. I said, what's going on? He said, all
hell seems to have broke loose in Saigon. So I got on
the brigade. I called my buddy at the brigade,
Sigma. I said, what the hell is going on? Because
the brigade had more communications with Saigon
than we had. He said, something crazy's going down
in Saigon. We don't know just yet. So I said, well, I
better tell the old man. I got the colonel up and
says, something hit the fan down in Saigon. I don't
know what's going on there. What the hell? It's a
ceasefire. There's supposed to be nothing going
on there. Well, it went about an hour later. You
know, this is dead at night. It's about an hour
later. We finally get the word. Ceasefire's off.
We start shooting our mortars and artillery
starting what they call H&I, harassment and
interdicting fire. by the time, there wasn't a bad
guy within 50 miles of us all down around the
side-gun area kicking ass. Well, we stayed up
there another couple of days and we got the orders
to tear down that base camp and return back to
Coochee, to our divisional headquarters, or
because of all the things that had happened, it was
that big Tet Offensive. So, yeah, I was in the Tet
Offensive, except the bad guys worked right past
it. And we got down to, the divisional
headquarters, which had been kind of like a
country club, and that place was torn up. I mean
there were shell holes all over the place, and I
had, talking to some of the guys that had been down
there, they were feeling sorry for us being on the
Cambodian border, and they cut off our help.
Although the Tet Offensive was a military defeat
for the enemy, was, it was, wasn't it also a
psychological defeat for the United States? Not,
not us. Every time we came into contact with
Charlie, we kicked his ass up. So the Tet Offensive
to you was not a bad sign? No, we whipped him. We
whipped him. No, we didn't feel bad. We just said,
geez, what are these people doing here? Don't they
realize they can't do this? Because every time we
would catch him like that, we'd get blown away. We
had such enormous firepower. So you still felt
that the war was winnable after the Tet Offensive?
Did you see it as the tide changing? Oh, heavens no.
In fact, you know, you're not going to believe
this, but we would wish that he would do that more
often. Try to come against us in a big offensive
like that. Come out of those underground tunnel
networks. Come out of the jungle. Because every
time he did that, we would stomp the snot out of him.
You see that? For every one of our cows, we must have
taken 20 of his. Never mind all this crap you hear
about inflated body counts. I sure am piled up
there like cordwood. They'd go in there, they'd
have an initial success against two MPs guarding
the front of a PX somewhere, and they'd commit 50
guys, and the next thing you know, we'd gang up on
those basses and take them out with a thousand
guys. You understand that? So, in a guerrilla war,
whenever they... break off the guerrilla war and
move to the conventional warfare stage, they got
the snot stomped out of them. They got killed, big
time. You know, there's no way to tell how many of
those people we killed during that Tet Offensive,
that first one. No, there's no telling.
But everything, every even small success like up
north in
We took everything back. So do we see that as a
turning point in the war? Yeah, we're saying, gee,
if these guys are going to keep this particular
strategy up, there's not going to be any soldiers
left up north. You see? Do you understand that? And
that's the thing that bothers me when I see Walter
Crankcase and Dan, whatever his name is, saying
this was a turning point.
the defeat of America. Bullshit. That's not true.
Do you think it had a lot to do with them being there
and showing it on TV? How important do you think the
media was? Oh, enormous. You see, those guys
communicated to the American people that we had
been whipped in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive.
And the American people said, oh my God, this is, oh
my, oh, this is so terrible. Oh, All our generals
are telling us that they went into war and these
guys take over the American embassy. My God. Stop.
But from a professional soldier standpoint, if
those guys would have done it all the time,
eventually there would be nobody left because
they got such a bad military whipping.
Politically. Oh, did they win politically?
Everything that they lost, they more than made up
for in the streets and on the television sets and
newspapers of America.
Think about that. Their victory in the Tet
Offensive wasn't in Vietnam. It was in Brooklyn
and
San Francisco and in Temple, Texas, on the streets
and in the living rooms of America. That's where
they won. Because there was such a biased news
reporting of Vietnam War. They didn't talk about
the big victory. They showed the kids getting
killed over there. The kids are talking about the
American soldiers. You see the American guys
getting shot at. Do you think they have a
responsibility, the media has, for showing the
public, or do you think they should have been kept
out of the war? Well, like in World War II, there was
a national effort towards winning the war. It even
existed in the media. Look at the movies, eye
bonds. Look at the news reporting, the radio
broadcasts. Everything was geared towards the
war efforts. Here, in Vietnam, that wasn't the
case. There was no popular support in the media for
a military victory in Vietnam. Why do you think
that?
I can speculate. Would you like me to speculate?
Sure.
Essentially, those individuals who were
professional soldiers were what we would call
today conservatives. Now, John F. Kennedy, Thai
conservatives,
what was prevalent in the arts, and the media is
part of the arts, is kind of a liberal attitude,
what we would call liberal today, I don't know what
you called it back then, but it was more of a
pacifist, accommodate, patronize,
non-violence, roses and sunshine. If you only
love somebody long enough, you'll win them over,
all kinds of stuff. And that filtered down into the
media's approach towards the interpretation of
the war. You know, a guy like Walter Cronkite, or a
guy like Dan Rather, or a guy like Tom Brokaw, he
wasn't...
The inflection that they... what they show, how
they describe it could have a profound effect upon
how the American people saw the war. Just, just an
inflection of the war. Now I didn't, I didn't see
all the coverage because I was over there where
they're making the movie. I wasn't back over here.
But the, the general consensus was amongst the
professional soldiers of Vietnam is that what got
back to us later on after it was over, after we had
come back from our tour, is that The American
people were getting kind of a one-sided view of the
war, like somehow it was an exercise in futility
that we could never defeat these people. You could
never win over there. It's not true we could. We had
the power to do it. And nobody likes frustration.
Nobody likes to be frustrated. Your sons and
husbands are going over there and they're getting
killed, but not for any real purpose, not for any
real good purpose. So that kind of upsets you.
You're usually going to get tired of hearing about
it. And every night you're seeing some kid getting
smoked on TV. Today in Vietnam, X number of GIs got
smoked, and this, that, and chicken. And living
from a couple TVs now, not black and white, with the
blood, and the screaming, and the bullets, and the
blowing up. And you're getting this seven days a
week. At six and at ten, Never mind the newspapers,
never mind Time magazine. That's just where I get
right down to the television stuff. That's the
main way that people receive information. And
Living Color, I mean, today in Vietnam, when I had
the footage, it wasn't six months ago, and it
wasn't censored by the government. Guys,
whatever, you know, old Vietnam, you'd be
surprised. I was a signal officer, right? So I was
always hanging around with the Chinese
headquarters. So I was a newsman around, doing
something. After a while, you get tired of it. What
kind of biased piece of reporting are you going to
do today? You just want to give us a break. So yeah,
did the media have a profound effect on the
eventual disposition of the conflict in Vietnam?
It was the controlling factor. I call it the media
war, if you want to call it that. Do you think they
had a right to do that, or do you think they were out
of... Oh, they sure had a right to do it. Do you think
they were out of line? Do you think that they... No,
I think those people were being honest to
themselves, but I think they have a distorted view
of what was going on over there. So you do agree that
they should have been over there? Should have been
over there. Because, see, this thing had never
really elevated itself to a real war, and if it had
been a real war, where the total power of the
nation... was committed to total and
unconditional defeat of the enemy. And their
outlook on the war was a lot different. It would
only last a couple of weeks. But this thing was an
ongoing story. And more and more Americans are
getting killed now. The leadership, you know, the
President of the United States,
Commander-in-Chief of all the military, the boss
doesn't know what he wants to do. So at least
they're uncertain in the rank. The soldiers are
doing the best job that they can. Every time they
catch Charlie, they twist his tail. They really go
after him. Charlie is a euphemistic expression
for the enemy. And... We've studied a lot about the
leadership and the problems, such as the one-year
tour of duty doesn't give you much time to learn
your manner. Make...
attachments with your troops? Or, or get you
acquainted with the surroundings? Do you agree
with that? Well, that's a theory. It said the Vien-
American didn't have ten years experience in
Vietnam and had one years experience ten times,
yeah. But that's not true because amongst the
non-commissioned officers and amongst the
officer corps, most of these guys were
careerists. It wasn't like in World War II where a
guy had just been drafted. Most of the, uh,
non-commissioned officers, sergeants, and
officers that I served with had been in the Army
before Vietnam started. So these guys were
committed towards the military service. Number
two, it doesn't take you a whole lot of time to get to
know 40 guys or 100 guys or who's ever working for
you, especially if they're also professional
soldiers and good soldiers. I can say that the men
that served under me and the people that I served
were all professionals. whether they had been in
the army for six months or 16 years, there'd be no
difference. They did their job very, very well as
they were trained to do.
Should the tours of duty over there have been
longer? No, I think considering the fact that
there wasn't very much popular support at home for
the war, it would have been really hard to stay over
there indefinitely until you got killed and
wounded to the point they had to be evacuated, so it
was nice to have something to look forward to
getting out of there for a while because that You
know, it's not like World War II where you're
getting all these great letters from home and
everybody's proud of you and all that stuff.
People at home didn't know what the hell was going
on. All they got was a distorted picture from the
media. So they were worried. You were worried
about your folks at home. You were worried about
yourself. Gee, you know, the government's so
uncertain about what's going on here. I don't want
to get killed for nothing. But you still try to do
your job.
So should we have just stayed over there forever
and ever and ever like in World War II? No. I don't
think so. I don't think it would be a good idea. The
war was pretty simple. There wasn't a whole lot of
sophistication to it. What you tried to do over in
Vietnam was kill the bad guys. That was it. That was
the job. We had the ground. We had the terrain to
belong to us. They were the interlopers. All they
had to do was find them and kill them. It was hard to
find them, though, wasn't it? Pretty sneaky,
yeah. tunnels and jungles, and sometimes they
disguised themselves to be civilians. What a
surprise. So, so it wasn't a terribly
sophisticated, well, like in a communications
standpoint, everybody talked about radio. Yeah,
didn't the United States spend a lot of money on
sophisticated equipment and smart bombs and
little devices that would sense a person that
looked like the IBM computers? Didn't they map on
those? Yeah, sure, but I mean, we were using that
technology in places other than Vietnam, too. We
used like those sensor devices, which were highly
classified. They were used in Czechoslovakia to
monitor, they were dropped over Europe to detect
Russian troop movements and all that kind of
stuff. It's what they call an unintended ground
sensor, and all it does is, it's like a little
seismographic. Something goes past it, it gives
us a signal thing, and the skies look like little
bushes and little trees and stuff. I mean, that's,
that's a little gadgets, but the, and all of this is
giving information that somebody's walking
past, whether it's a water buffalo or a platoon of
Viet Cong, you don't know. So you, yeah, there was a
lot of tech, like the M16 being a high-tech weapon,
right? It was made out of plastic and it had
die-cast parts and a tiny little high-velocity
bullet, but it, you know, it's still a lagoon that
shoots people. Ain't no different than something
Napoleon had. So... But it wasn't a terribly
sophisticated war.
The whole trick was to find out where the bad guys
were and then smoke them. Kill them. That's all.
You mentioned the career soldier a lot. I'm sorry.
Yeah. But
in a lot of the books we've read, they mention that a
lifer was this worst kind of soldier. to lead you
because of the careerism and the attitudes of, to
be selfish motives when you're leading your men.
Did you experience any of that? Did you see that?
Yeah, some of the guys would say, oh, you're a
lifer. I'd say, yeah, sure, I'm a lifer. If you want
to say a lifer, I'm a professional soldier. It's my
job. My return was, would you like to be taken, led
into combat by an amateur or professional? But
some career soldiers, did you ever see them making
totally selfish moves? Some of the books we read,
they wouldn't tell their men about the Viet Cong
waiting or the camp because they wanted them to be
extra alert and they didn't want them to maybe shy
away from the camp. No, I didn't see any of that. A
bad leader, did you ever see that? Oh, sure. Not
just a stupid one, but someone with the wrong
motives. No, no, no. No, I didn't say that. I saw a
lot of bad leaders in the sense that leadership is a
technical and a personal attribute. You have to
have no technical things. You have to know how to
lead. How do you maneuver a company? How do you
maneuver a battalion? How do you plan a military
operation? Yeah, to be a leader you have to have
some technical training. Then you have to have
personal characteristics that are very
important. Some guys had it more than others. They
were good leaders and bad leaders. You have good
brain surgeons and bad surgeons. You have good
college professors and you have not so good
college professors, right? That's just a human
trait. It has nothing to do with being a soldier.
And if you weren't good at what you did, you didn't
do it for very long. The boss would find somebody
else to do it. You take a simple job like a guy whose
responsibility was to be a platoon leader, and he
went out and he did something wrong, when he should
have been able to figure out how to do it correctly,
he was usually sent back and he was in charge of the
mesh kit repair company or something. Or some guy
who was reluctant to take, to lead his men
properly, he was relieved that somebody else was
put in there. Senator, you don't see careerism as a
major problem? Well, what do you mean by
careerism? Careerism as... Let's make the most of
this situation because it's the only war we've
got. Yeah, I think as a professional soldier, they
all thought about the impact that this conflict or
war would have on their career. You have to think
about that.
Well, for example, there was a passage in a book...
I think you want to do well, though. Because if you
do poorly, it's going to screw up your career. So
you want to do well. Okay, there was a passage in our
book about one military leader who, he was so set on
having a high body count of Vietnamese that when
the medevac came in, instead of putting his
wounded on, he wanted to put the dead Vietnamese
on. I mean, did you ever see him? Never, ever. Never
saw anything like that. I saw a guy's, commanding
officers who would bend over backwards to do
things for their men. Like get them extra chow or
get into new weapons. When they new weapons came
out, they want to get it first or to get them a
three-day break somewhere or an extra R&R. I'm
talking about those guys that really busted their
buns for their soldiers. I saw that more than I saw
nonsense like you're talking about. I don't know
who reported that, but I've never seen anything
like that.
How about fragging? No, none of that went on when I
was there. That was later on when America pulled
back from the combat role and the guys were just
sitting around the barracks and had nothing to do.
The drugs were a big problem later on too. Did you
see him when you were there? Yeah, I'd be out in the
jungle in a fire base or something and one of my
soldiers would come walking by and he's got a bag of
marijuana and he had a big enough choke of horse and
I said, what the hell do you got there? He says, he
just bought it from the mama sign over here. I said,
what'd you give for it? He says, a couple of peas,
like $2 for a pound of local wheat. He says, you're
not going to, all right, dump it out, man. Oh, come
on, Captain. I said, dump it out. And usually guys
who did that were real zorches anyway. I mean, this
is a guy who, his job in the battalion was to go
around and burn the cans of shit. And so we got rid of
the, some yo-ho like that, some rum diddy and a
goo-goo wasn't worth anything. He'd have a job
like that. No, and, uh, fragging? Nah, I didn't see
that. There was not one, one instance of that. And
it really is hilarious in that movie, the platoon
had us two sergeants, one was trying to kill the
other. You never saw that. You know, later on, in,
uh, I guess in the early 70s, it started having a lot
of fragging incidents, and I heard about that. Who
was doing it? These were the guys... They were,
they really weren't soldiers. They were just
civilians who were there against their will and
they just were rebelling against the symbol of
authority and they were petty anyway. They'd
throw a hand grenade under a sleeping lieutenant.
I mean, that takes a lot of guts to do that. Those
guys are never soldiers. A soldier would never do
that. A real soldier would never do that. Speaking
of soldiers, what did you think about the armed
forces? I didn't see a whole lot of it, but they were
okay individually. They weren't,
they weren't as good as Americans.
They weren't as good, they weren't as highly
motivated. Believe it or not, they were fighting
for their own country. We were, but the American
soldier was a better motivated combat soldier
than some of the Arlins I saw. Now a good buddy of
mine advised a was a signal advisor to an Arvin
division, and I went over to see him, and he said,
what is the kind of hair you got here? These guys are
a little loose. Because American soldiers were,
believe it or not, forget all the Hollywood
movies, pretty well organized, pretty well
structured. They could do something. You snap
your fingers and you can get 24,000 guys to move in
one direction at one time. The Arvins were just a
little goofy-looky about that. They were just...
And I don't know is if it's as much an Arvin problem
or it's just a cultural problem with all of that
part of the world. The North Vietnamese were not
supermen either. They kind of goofed up a few
times, so. So I think, did I have a lot of contact
with the Arvins? No. Did I see them? Did you ever
fight with them? No, no, no. They, sometimes like
we got hit one night and We were 150 soldiers with
three tubes of 105 millimeter artillery. We got
hit by a North Vietnamese regiment of about a
thousand. We fought all night and we just, it was a
hell of a battle. And then that morning when the sun
came up, an ARVN unit came in to sweep the jungle to
flush out any wounded
or anything like that. But you know, they were
okay. They were alright. You know, a lot of those
Army soldiers were guys that, until they became a
soldier, couldn't read or write. They went out in
the boondocks working on a rice field. A lot of
Saigon cowboys, I wonder how they avoided the
draft.
And a lot of people in America avoided the draft,
too, for some reason. Do you have any combat
experiences you'd like to talk about? Any
particular... horrifying ones, or ones that
stand out as, did you ever feel like you were a hero?
No, no, you don't. It's a son of a bitch to get shot
at. I see friends blowing up. I see a lieutenant,
but he's riding in a jeep, and he was just heading
out of a fire base, and a remote-controlled bomb
went off under his butt and blew him to a million
pieces. Nice young fellow. Cut him right in the
hand. I was sitting on top of a bunker out in a
dried-out rice field with another captain, and he
and I were smoking Kent cigarettes. And the only
tree in the whole area was the one we were sitting
under, and a sniper opened up on it. And it was the
only casualty I sustained in the Vietnam War. What
happened? Well, the bullets went right over the
top. The guy was firing an AK-47, and he wasn't a
very good shot. He wasn't an American marksman,
that's for sure. He cut loose at all 30 rounds and
went over our heads. Because I remember the leaves
coming down as the bullets popped through the
tree. And this captain and I immediately fell
forward. And as I fell forward, the cigarette
broke off and the hot end of it went up my
nose. Oh, that really got me angry. Boy, that hurt
like hell. If you don't think a hot cigarette up
your nose doesn't hurt. And I knew where the
bullets were coming from, you could tell. So I went
over there with a .50 caliber machine gun. I
cranked it and they fired one round and the gun
jammed. I picked up an M16, fired one round, and
that damn thing jammed. So I grabbed my .45 out,
fired one round, and that damn thing jammed. I
threw the .45 down, sat down, lit up another
second, said, the hell with it, you can go home. So
you didn't kill him? No, I sent a bunch of guys, they
go out that wood line, they found a stack of empty
brass that was still warm. That was it. They
brought the brass back in a hat. In contrast to
seeing your friends die, how did you feel when you
killed... When I killed somebody, I never killed
anybody. You never killed anyone? Mm-hmm. How's
that? Doing my job. I was a signal launcher. So you
were never out there in the field fighting? Yeah,
mm-hmm. But it's not like you and I sitting in this
room, we would smoke. Never did that. In fact, very
few guys ever did that. Very rarely did that
happen. And I saw a lot of dead North Vietnamese,
hundreds and hundreds, and I didn't know that our
boys had killed. But I never pulled a trigger on
myself. A captain It's not my job to go out there and
stick a bayonet in somebody. Do you think you'd
have a different attitude now if you had actually
killed people? Well, see, when you say kill, I pull
out a gun and shoot you, that's killing. I get on the
radio and call an airstrike and there's two tons of
napalm on it. That's a little distant. So yeah, I
guess I've been responsible for the death of
people over there. But if they had stayed home in
North Vietnam, they wouldn't have gotten into
trouble. Do I feel bad about it? No. What about the
innocent South Vietnamese? War's hard. War's
really tough, you know. People get killed in the
war. I don't feel any worse about that than the fact
that we took out Hiroshima, Nagasaki, Dresden,
Hamburg. You know, in Hamburg, thousands and
thousands of civilians perished in bomb shelters
and firestorms. You know how they died? It melted,
the intense heat. Now do I feel bad about that? Sure
I feel bad about anybody getting killed. But
that's what war is all about. That's what war is
all about. Okay, um... That's why you should never
undertake a war. Halfway. Halfway, precisely. So
would you say that was our problem with the war, is
that we didn't commit fully? Yeah. Not the
leadership or the conventional versus
guerrilla?
I don't know how I can make this point clear. But
life in America during the Vietnam War was damn
good in America. There's cars, there's plenty of
cars and everybody was, we had TVs and plenty of
work and making good money. Wow, life is great.
Lots of leisure time, terrific vacations. The
dollar was king, you know, four marks to the dollar
in Europe. Life in America was good except for one
little thing. Every so often, somebody you knew
came home in an aluminum coffin.
It's almost as if the price of the prosperity that
America enjoyed during the Johnson years, the
Great Society, it's almost as if the price for that
was paid with blood in Vietnam. I've got a
suspicion about that. I'm not entirely sure that
that's correct, but I got a sneaky feeling that
that quality of life and the great social programs
that Johnson put into effect during the real big
bill in Vietnam was not paid for with the blood of
American lions in the jungles and the ice fields of
South Africa. Now, that'd be something for you to
take a look at. Everybody thinks about Johnson as
the Vietnam president, but he was a great society.
He was the New Deal phase two. He's going to pick up
where FDR left off. He's a protege to Franklin
Delano Roosevelt. And he saw this as his golden
opportunity to really make a difference in
American life. And that damn Flanagan, that was to
be a non-war, but I think that's what paid. What?
For the first break. Deemployment, you know. Oh,
so you think that... You think that can of
C-rations got to the American soldier in a foxhole
free? No, somebody had to pay for it and put it
there. Somebody had to put it in a little tin can and
put it in a box and then ship it. A war is a great
builder of prosperity at home. Look at World War
II. The depression in America didn't end until
World War II started.
I got a funny feeling that if some historian were to
take a hard look at it, maybe you're going to take a
historian and a sociologist who have been
studying the society
from an analytical standpoint,
that The war in Vietnam created greatly to the
prosperity that America enjoyed during the same
period of time that the war was going on. Got a funny
feeling about
that. Um, if you, do you have, would you like to add
anything else or can, I'd like to ask you about how
and why you came home. Well I came home because my
wife got real sick. And the Red Cross, I was due to
come home in January, I got a call in December
saying to get home. Red Cross and Telegram. It was
right after you were born. Right after you were
born. And Mama got sick, she had a problem and the
Red Cross said to get her home. So I left a month
early, after 11 months. I was out of combat for all
intents and purposes though because I was back at
the division headquarters and I was a radio
systems engineer. That's a fancy job for a guy who
just fooled around radio. I was a staff officer
then. I spent nine months in combat and two months
behind a desk. I
got the telegram at 8.30 in the morning and at one
o'clock I was gone. I packed my bags and I left all my
gear there. I took one suitcase and that vase up
there, see that vase in the middle? That's from a
Buddhist temple in Saigon that the tanks were
gonna crush. It's a beautiful vase. That's the
only souvenir I brought home. I took about 20
pictures in a year somewhere, I don't know where
they are. I came home, not by any organized means. I
came, I
was wearing my jungle fatigues, all dirty and
everything. Even though I was a desk officer, it
was hot and everything.
Got on a helicopter to Town Center Air Base.
Grabbed a cargo plane from Town Center to the
Philippines. Sat in a chair for 24 hours at Clark
Air Force Base in the Philippines and grabbed a
commercial flight to Hawaii. I remember getting
off the plane at Hawaii, 8.30 in the morning. And
I'm still in the same closet I've been wearing for
three days now. Got a beard and everything. Going
to a coffee shop. in the airport and all these
civilians looked at me like I wasn't there, like I
was invisible. I sat at the counter in a coffee shop
with all these ladies with their blue hair and
their muumuu's and their flowers and they're lazy
getting ready to go back to their states after a
beautiful Hawaiian vacation, like there wasn't
even a war on. That hurt you? No, it didn't hurt me,
it just made me realize that most civilians didn't
care. As long as the war didn't affect them
personally, they didn't really care about it. I'm
sitting there in the coffee shop and everybody's
eating their pancakes and their fresh pineapple
and it was gorgeous, a beautiful coffee shop in the
airport. And I said to the waitress, I said, look,
it's 8.30 in the morning, I'm just coming back from
Vietnam. Can I please have two boilermakers? I'd
say a glass of beer and a double shot of whiskey. She
says, Captain, you got it.
And I slept on a plane from Hawaii back to the
States, got into San Francisco, and that plane
from Hawaii to San Francisco was continuing on
with the same flight crew to New York. And the
stewardess said, God bless him, they had seen a lot
of guys coming. They put me in the plane there, and
they covered me up with blankets and everything,
and they gave me a two-steak dinner. They gave me a
couple of shots of bourbon, and I said, we'll wake
you up when we get to New York, because I was pretty
whacked out by The plane was empty. And these are
the same students that have been shuttling guys
all back and across the Pacific now for years. And I
wonder what those students could have to say about
how many guys they took and how many guys they
brought back and what the difference was. I wonder
what that had. I don't know what they thought.
After I got back to New York, that was the biggest
surprise of my life. I got off the plane at JFK or
LaGuardia, I forget which one it was. LaGuardia
Airport. Yeah. It's
like 6.30 in the morning and all these businessmen
are catching a shuttle flight to D.C. and stuff
like that. Here I'm getting off the plane in jungle
fatigues. And it's cold in New York in December.
And these guys don't even see me. Not one of them
came up to me and said, hey, thanks for what you're
doing. Just like they didn't even want to
acknowledge the fact that I was there. I felt
pretty low. Then did that hurt? Wow, that hurt, you
know. See all these very nicely dressed
businessmen with their suits and their camo hair
coats and their briefcases and their shiny shoes,
going about their business, because that's what
all the shuttle flights leave out. Going to
Boston, going to Philly, going to DC. All these
businessmen and not one person came over to me or
even, even as I passed them, So I went in the
bathroom, it was kind of early, the bathroom at the
airport, and I cleaned up. I washed a little bit and
shaved, and I had some civilian clothes in my
suitcase. I put those on because I didn't want my
wife to see me in my dirty old fatigues, all smelly
and nasty.
And I grabbed the cab to the apartment, and the
Puerto Rican cab driver, and I had to give him
directions. Nice guy. He didn't say anything to me
either because he didn't know who the hell I was.
I got to the apartment and my wife wasn't there. She
had gone to the bakery to get some, but my
mother-in-law was there, her pop, she was there.
And oh my God, she was so happy to see me. They were
all relieved. And then mommy came up and she was
feeling pretty sick, but I could tell she was
enormously relieved. But she had had a baby while I
was gone. And we had fresh bread and real coffee and
sat in the kitchen. We didn't talk about the war
over there. We just talked about the family
catching up on all that stuff. There was not much of
a homecoming. My family was happy to see me. I
remember seeing Jennifer when I left her. She was a
tiny little baby, three, four months old, and now
she was wearing dresses and had long hair, and it
was really quite exciting. Then later on that
afternoon, my folks came from Staten Island to
Queens with my other daughter. I didn't see her as
tiny. I think about three or four months old. It's
like,
what went through my mind was all that was behind me
now. Do you think that your life, how do you think
Vietnam changed you as a person? Not at all. Not at
all? No. See, I was a professional soldier. When I
spent eleven years in the Army, and Vietnam was
only one tenth of that, roughly ten percent of my
military service was spent in Vietnam. I think
what had more impact upon my life was leadership
school when I was making OCS. I think being a father
had more impact on my life than being a Vietnam
soldier. Did you feel like people didn't
understand you or couldn't relate to you or what
you'd experienced? No, I didn't expect any
civilian to understand what a soldier's been
through has been a combat. No civilian could
understand it. So I didn't feel special. Did you
feel foreign to people? Like you couldn't, did you
feel like you had changed at all to where people...
I was the same guy I was when I went there.
No, it had no effect. And that's another thing, I
see all these guys who were traumatized by the
Vietnam experiences. I wonder if they're really
being sincere about that. I'm sure some of them are
because there's always people that are
traumatized by the horror of war.
But I don't think those fellows are any different
than the guys in World War II or in Korea or the
Spanish-American War or the Civil War. I mean,
yeah, war's a nasty thing, but you tend to put those
things behind you. And, you know, the vast
majority of the guys that went to Vietnam...